The Huntington's Disease is a heritable brain disease. Whether or not an individual develops it depends on the length of the longest chain of consecutive CAG triplets in in a region called Exon 1 of this person's huntingtin gene. This length is referred to as an allele.

Every human carries two copies of the huntingtin gene, one inherited from each parent. The disease outcome is determined by the dominant allele, meaning the longer of the longest chains from the two copies. For example, if an individual has two alleles: 17 and 22, his disease outcome is determined by the 22 allele.

When two humans reproduce, their copies of the huntingtin gene reassemble randomly in their offspring, leading to four possible pairs of alleles. In each of these pairs, the dominant allele determines the disease outcome. For example, if two individuals with allele pairs [17, 22] and [19, 24] mated, their offspring would have a 25% probability of getting each of the [17, 19], [17, 24], [22, 19], and [22, 24] pairs. Consequently, the offspring would have a 25% chance of getting the allele 19, a 25% chance of getting the allele 22, and a 50% chance of getting the allele 24.

It is important to note that whereas the whole gene has approximately 170,000 nucleotides, Exon 1 has only 300 nucleotides, each of which is marked by a single letter. The disease outcome is determined only by the longest consecutive chain in Exon 1. For example, if an individual had a chain of 12 triplets in his Exon 1 and another chain of 48 somewhere else in the huntingtin gene, his allele from this copy of the gene would be 12, not 48.